okay this is uh lecture six in linear
algebra and uh we're at the start of
this new chapter chapter three in the
text which is really getting to the
center of linear algebra and uh I had
time to make a first start on it at the
end of lecture five but now is lecture
six uh is officially the lecture on
Vector spaces and
subspaces and then especially there are
two ve two subspaces that we're
specially interested in one is the
column space of a matrix the other is
the null space of the Matrix so I got to
tell you what those are okay
so first to remember from lecture
five what is a vector space it's a bunch
of
vectors that where I'm allowed where I
can add I can add any two vectors in the
space and the answer it stays in the
space or I can multiply any Vector in
the space By Any constant and the result
stays in the space
so that's in fact if I combine those two
into
one you can see that if I can add and I
can multiply by by numbers that really
means that I can take linear
combinations so the quick way to say it
is that
all linear combinations C any multiple
of V plus any multiple of w stay in the
space so can I give you examples that
our Vector spaces
and also some examples that are not to
to make that point clear so suppose I'm
in uh three
dimensions then uh one way to get us
one uh one space is the whole
three-dimensional space so the whole
Space
R3 threedimensional
space would be a vector space because if
I have a couple of vectors I can add
them and I'm certainly okay and they
follow all the
rules so R3 is easy now I'm interested
also in
subspaces so there's this key word
subspaces that's a space of that's some
vectors
inside the given space inside R3 that
still make up a vector space of their of
their own it's a vector space inside a
vector space and the simplest example
was a plane so like can I just sketch it
there there is a plane it's got to go
through the origin and of course it goes
infinitely far that's a that's a
Subspace now do you see that if I have
two vectors on the plane and I add them
the result stays in the plane if I take
a vector in the plane and I multiply by
min-2 I'm still in the plane so that
plane is a Subspace so let me just make
that point
plane through
zero through that 0 0 0 is a
Subspace okay and
also uh another Subspace would be a
line a line through 0000 yeah the line
has to go through the origin all
subspaces have got to contain the origin
contain zero the zero Vector so this
line is a Subs line is a
Subspace really if
I if I want to say it really correctly I
should say a Subspace of R3 that's I
that of R3 was like understood there now
so let me call this plane P and let me
call this line L
and let me ask you
about other uh set
other sets of vectors suppose I
took yeah here here so here's a first
question suppose I take two subspaces
like
p&l and I just put them together take
their Union take all the vectors so so
now I you've got P and L in mind here so
I have two
subspaces I have two
subspaces and for
example p a plane and L A Line okay now
I want to ask you about the union of
those so P Union L this is all
vectors
in P or l or
MO is that a
Subspace is this a Subspace
this is or is
not a
Subspace because we I just want to be
sure that I've got the central
idea suppose I take the vectors in the
plane and also the vectors on that
line put them together so I've got a
bunch of vectors is it a Subspace can
you give me like so the camera can hear
it or maybe the tape can you say yes or
no do I have a Subspace if I put if I
take all the vectors on the plane plus
all and all the ones on the line and
just join them together but I'm not
taking this guy that's
actually I'm not taking most of them
because most vectors are not on the line
or the plane they're off somewhere else
do I have a
Subspace no right thank you no because
why not because I can't add because if I
that that requirement isn't satisfied if
I take one vector like this guy and
another Vector that happens to come from
L and add I'm off somewhere else
you see that I that I've gone
outside the union if I just add
something from p and something from L uh
then normally what'll happen is I'm
outside the Union uh the and I don't
have a Subspace so the correct answer is
is
not okay now let me ask you about the
other thing we do is take the
intersection so what does intersection
mean mean intersection means all
vectors that are in
both P and
L is this a
Subspace yeah so I guess I want to go
back up to the same question this is or
is not a Subspace and you can answer me
answer the question first for this
particular example this picture I drew
what's what is p intersect L for this
case it's only
zero at least sort of this was the
artist's idea as he drew it that uh that
that line L was not in the
plane and uh went off somewhere else and
then the only point that was in common
was the zero Vector is the zero vector
by itself a Subspace yes absolutely and
what about uh uh if I if if I don't have
this plane and this line but any
Subspace and any other
Subspace so now can can I ask that
question for any two
subspaces so maybe I'll write it up
here if I'm strong enough okay so this
is the general question I have
subspaces say
S&T
and I want to ask you about their
intersection s intersect T and I want it
is a
Subspace do you see
why do you see why if I take the vectors
that are in both one that are in both of
the
subspaces so that's like a smaller set
of vectors probably because it's we've
added requirements it has to be in s and
in
t how do I know that's a Subspace can we
just think through that abstract stuff
and then I get to the
examples okay so why suppose I take a
couple of vectors that are in the
intersection why is the sum also in the
intersection okay so let me give a name
to these vectors say V and
W they're in the intersection so that
means they're both in
s also means they're both in
t so what can I say about v+
W is it in
s yes right if if I take two vectors V
and W that are both in s then the sum is
in s because s was a
Subspace and if they're both in T and I
add them then the result is also in in t
because T was a Subspace so the
result V + W is in the intersection it's
in both and requirement one is
satisfied requirement two is the same if
I take a vector that's in both I
multiply by seven 7even times that
Vector is in s because the vector was in
s seven times that Vector is in t
because the the original one was in t so
stimes that vector is in the
intersection in other
words when you take the intersection of
two subspaces you get probably a smaller
Subspace but it is a Subspace okay so
that's like sort
of just emphasizing what these two
requirements
mean again to to to to let me Circle
those because those are so important the
the sum and the scalar multiplication
which which combines into linear
combinations that's what you have to do
inside the Subspace okay on to the
column
space okay so my lecture last time
started that and I want to continue it
okay column space of a
matrix of a okay can I can I take an
example say say 1 2 3
4 1 1 1
1 2 3 4
five
okay that's my Matrix
a so it's got columns three
columns those columns are vectors so the
columns so the column space of this a
of this a let me let's stay with this
example for a while the column space of
this Matrix is a Subspace of
r r what so what space are we in if I'm
looking at The Columns of this
Matrix
R4 right these These are vectors in R4
they're four-dimensional vectors so it
say column space of a is uh is a
Subspace
of R4
here because a was 4 by a is a 4x3
matrix this tells me how many rows there
are how many components in a column and
so we're in R4 Okay now what's in that
Subspace what's so the column space of a
it's a Subspace of
R4 I call it the column space of a like
that so that's that's my little symbol
for some Subspace of
R4 what's in R what's in that Subspace
well that column certainly is 1 2 3 4
this column is in this column is in and
what
else so it's got The Columns of a in it
but that's not enough
certainly right I don't have a Subspace
if I just put in three vectors so how do
I fill that out to be a Subspace I
take
their linear
combinations so the column space of a is
all
linear
combinations combinations of the
colors and that does give me a Subspace
it does give me a vector space because
if I have one linear combination and I
multiply by 11 I've got another lar
combination if I have a linear
combination I add to another linear
combination I get a third
combination so that this is like the
smallest
space like it it's got to have those
three columns in it and it has to have
their combinations and that's where we
stop okay now I I'm going to be
interested in that
space so like get some idea what's in
that space how big is that space is that
space the whole four dimensional
space or is it a Subspace inside can you
let me just see if you
can I mean we can get a yes or no answer
sometimes
without without being ready for the
complete
proof what do you think is the Subspace
that I'm talking about here the
combinations of those three guys does
that fill the full four-dimensional
space maybe yes or no on that one no no
somehow our feeling
is and it happens to be right that if we
start with three vectors and take their
combinations we can't get the whole
four-dimensional
Space uh
now so somehow we get a smaller space
but how much
smaller uh that's okay that's going to
come up here that's not so immediate
uh let me let me uh first make this
critical connection
with with um linear equations because
behind our abstract definition we have a
purpose and that is to understand ax
equal B so suppose I make the
connection
does
axal B
always have have a solution for every
B have a have
a
solution for every right hand
side I guess that's going to be a yes or
no
question and then I'm going to ask which
right hand sides are okay
that that's really the question I'm
after is which right hand sides
B do make a you can see from the way I'm
speaking what's the answer to this
question as it is the answer is
no ax equal B does not have a solution
for every
B why why do you say why do I say
no because ax equal B is it's really
this is like this is four
equations and only three
unknowns right X is let me let let me
let me write out that whole what the
whole thing looks
like
yeah let me write out ax equal B ax
is these columns are 1 2 3 4 1 one one 1
and 2 3 4
5 then X of course has three components
X1 X2 X3 and I'm trying to get
the hit the right right hand side B1 B2
B3 and
B4 so my first point is I can't always
do it
in a way that just says again what you
told me five minutes
ago that the
combinations of these columns don't fill
the whole four-dimensional Space there's
going to be some vectors b a lot of
vectors B that are not combinations of
those of these three
columns because the combinations of
those columns are like going to be just
a little plane or something inside
inside
R4 now so and you see that I do have
four equations and only three unknowns
so like anybody is going to say no you
dope you can't usually solve four
equations with only three unknowns but
now I want to
say sometimes you can for some right
hand sides I can solve
this so that's the that's the bunch of
right hand sides that I'm interested in
right now which right hand
sides allow me to solve this this is the
question for today it's going to have
like a nice clear
answer so my my question is that so my
question
is
which B's which vectors B allow
me allow this system to be
solved
and I I want to ask you so that's
like gets two question marks to indicate
that's this is the important question
okay first before we give a give a total
answer give me just a partial
answer tell me one right hand side that
I know I can solve this thing for so all
zeros okay that's the like guaranteed if
B's were all zero then I know I can
solve it let the X's all be zero no
problem okay
so that's that's always okay ax equals z
i can always solve now tell me another
right hand side just a specific set of
numbers for which I can solve
this this these three these four
equations with only three unknowns but
if you give me the a good right hand
side I can do it so tell me
one 1 2 3
4 if I can I solve is this a is that a
good right hand
side can you solve can you find a
solution that X1 + X2 + 2 X3 is 1 2 X1 +
X2 + 3x3 is 2 and two more
equations so I'm asking you to solve in
your head in within 5
Seconds uh four equations and three
unknowns but you can do it because the
right hand side is
like showing up here it's it's it's one
of the columns so tell me what's the x
that does solve
it one 0 one 0 0 solves
it
because well you can multiply this out
by rows but oh God it's much nicer to
say okay this is one of this column zero
of this zero of this so it's one of that
column which is exactly what we
wanted okay so there is a b that's
okay now tell me another B that's okay
another right hand side that would be
all
right well all
ones
actually and then what's the solution in
that case 0 one0
thanks
and in fact it's much like one way to do
it is think of a solution first right
and then just see
what B turns out to
be what B turns out to be right okay uh
so I think of a solution so I think of
an X I think of any X1 X2 X3 I do this
multiplication and what have I
got where now now I'm ready to answer
the big
question I can solve axal B exactly when
the right hand side B is a vector
in the column space good I can solve
axal B B when B is a combination of the
columns when it's in the column space so
let me write that answer
down I can I can
solve axal B exactly
when B is in the column
space let me just say again why that
is because it the column Space by its
definition contains all the combinations
it contains all the
AXS the column space really consists of
all vectors A * n
x so that's those are the B's that I can
deal
with if B is a combination of the
columns then that combination tells me
what x should
be if B is not a combination of the
columns then there is no X there's no
way to solve ax equal B
okay so the column Space is really the
that's that's really why we're
interested in this column space because
it's the central guy it says when we can
solve and and
so
so we got to understand this column
space
better let's see do I do I want to
think yeah
somehow oh well let's just as long as
we've got it here what do I get for this
particular example if I take
combinations of this and this and
this I I'll tell you the question that's
in my
mind it's it's not even proper to use
this word yet but you'll know what it
means are those three columns
independent if I take the combinations
of the three columns does it does each
column contribute something
new or not so that if I take the
combinations of those three columns do I
like get some three-dimensional Subspace
do I have three vectors that are like
you
know independent whatever that
means or do I do a or do or does is one
of those columns like contributing
nothing new so that actually only two of
The Columns would have given the same
column space yeah that's a good way to
ask the question finally I think of it
can I throw away any
columns and have the same column space
yes
and which one do you suggest I throw
away well three is the natural like guy
to Target so if I and why
because what what did you what's so bad
about three here column three it's it's
the sum of these right so it's not if
I'm taking if I have combinations of
these two and I put in this one actually
I don't get anything more so later on I
will call these pivot
columns and the third guy will not be a
pivot column in this with that with
those numbers now actually but honesty
makes me ask you this question could I
have thrown away column
one yes I could I
could so when I'd say pivot columns my
convention is okay I'll keep the first
ones as long as they're not dependent so
like keep this guy he's fine he's Al
line I keep the second guy it's in a
second Direction but the third one which
is in the same plane as the first two
gives me nothing new it's dependent in
the in the language that we will use and
I don't need it
okay so I would describe the column
space of this Matrix as a
two-dimensional Subspace of
R4 a two-dimensional Subspace of R4 okay
so you're seeing how these Vector spaces
work and you you're seeing that we some
idea of dependence or Independence is is
in our future okay now I want to speak
about another Vector space the null
space so again I'm getting a little
ahead because it's in section 3.2 but
that's okay all right now so I'm I'm
ready for the null
space let me keep the same
Matrix and this is going to be a
different totally different Subspace
totally different
okay now so let me make space for now
here here comes a completely different
Subspace the null
space of a
what's in
it it
contains not right hand sides
B it contains
X's it contains all X's that solve this
word null is going to I mean that's the
key word here meaning zero so this
contains this is all
solutions
X and of course X's our vectors X1 X2
and
X3 to the equation a x =
z well four
equations because we got so you see what
I'm doing I'm now saying okay columns
were great the column space we
understood now I'm interested in
X's I'm not the only B I'm interested in
now is the B of all zeros the right hand
side is now
zero and I'm interested in
Solutions X's so where is this null
space for for this
example these X's are have three
components so the null space is a
Subspace we still have to show it is a
Subspace of
R
three so this is and and we will show so
these these vectors X this is
in
R3 where the column space was in R4 in
our example in in for an M byn Matrix
this is
M and this is
m because the number of columns n tells
me how many unknowns how many X's
multiply those columns so it tells me
the big space in this case R3 that I'm
in now tell me why don't we figure out
what the null space is for this
example uh just by looking at it I mean
that's the beauty of small
examples that my official way to find
null space
and column spaces and and and get all
the facts straight would be elimination
and we'll do that but with a small
example we can see see what's going on
without going through the mechanics of
elimination so so this null
space so I'm talking about the again the
null space and let me copy Again The
Matrix 1 2 3 4 1 1 one one and 2 3 4
5 what's in the null space so I'm I'm
taking a *
X so let me I'm me write it again and I
want you to
solve those four
equations in fact I want you to find all
solutions to those four
equations well actually first of all
find one I why should I ask you for all
of them tell me one well tell me one
solution that you you don't even have to
have to look at the Matrix to know one
solution to this set of equations it
is zero Vector whatever that Matrix is
it's null space contains zero because a
times the zero Vector sure gives the
zero right hand side so the null space
certainly contains
zero so it's got a chance to be a vector
space now and it and it will turn out it
is okay tell me the tell me another
solution so this particular null space
and of course I'm going to call it n of
a for null
space this
contains well we've already located the
zero vector and now you're going to tell
me another Vector that's in the null
space another solution another X another
you see what I'm asking you for is a
combination of those columns that's what
I'm I'm always looking at combinations
of columns but now I'm looking at the
X the the the the the weights the
coefficients in the combination so tell
me a good set of numbers to put in
there one
one one one minus one
thanks 1 one minus one so there's a
vector that's in it
okay but have I got a Subspace at this
point certainly not right I got just a
couple of vectors no way they make a
Subspace tell me actually why don't I
jump the whole way now tell
me well tell me one more
Solution One More X that would
work 22
-2 oh well tell me all of them that
would have been easier tell me the whole
lot now what what is the null space for
this
matrix it's all vectors of the form so
what what could what could this be it
could be 1 one minus one it could be any
it could be any number
c any number the same number again
and minus C in other words
actually and any multiple of this guy oh
that's that's the perfect description
because now the zero vectors
automatically included because C could
be zero the vector I had is included cuz
C could be one but now any vector and
that's actually
it and do I have a do I have a
Subspace and what does it look like it's
in so what what how would you describe
this the null space this all these
vectors of this form c c minus C like 7
7 -
7 - 11 - 11 + 11 what have I got
here if it describe that whole null
space what if I drew
it what do I
draw a line right the null space is a
line it's the line through it's it's in
R3
and the vector 1 one1 maybe goes down
here I don't know where it goes they
down here there's the vector 1 one1 that
you gave
me and where is the vector c c c it's on
this line of course there's 0 0 that we
had and what we've got is that whole
whoops that whole line going both ways
through the origin
the null space is a line in
R3
okay for that example we we could find
all the combinations of the columns that
gave zero at site now can I just take
one more time to go back to the
definition of
Subspace Vector space
and ask you to why how do I know that
the null space is a vector space how am
I entitled to use this word space I'll
never use that word space without
meaning that the two requirements are
satisfied can we just check that they
are so I'm going to check that look can
I just continue here check
that that the solution
to ax = 0
always
give a
Subspace and the course the keyword
is that space so what do I have to
check what I have to show that if I have
one solution call it X and another
solution call it
xar that their sum is also a solution
right that's the that's a requirement to
use that word space I have to say I have
to convince myself that if ax is
zero
and also an ax star is zero or maybe I
should have said if AV is zero and a w
is zero then and what about V + W so I
let me use those letters if a v is zero
and a w is
zero then what then what is it what's
the if that and that then what's my
point here that a * V + W must
be zero that says that if V is in the n
space and W is in the null space then
there some V plus W is in the null space
and of course now that I've written it
down it's totally absurd ridiculously
simple
because matrix multiplication allows me
to separate that out into AV plus a
w i shouldn't say absurdly simple that
was a dumb thing to say we've used here
a base basic law of matrix
multiplication actually we've used it
without proving it but that's okay we
only live so long and just skip that
proof uh I think it's called the
distributive law that I can split these
split this into two pieces but but now
you see the point that that AV is zero
and a w is z so I have 0 plus 0 and I do
get zero it
checks and similarly I have to to show
that if AV is zero then a * any multiple
say 12 V is also zero and how do I know
that because I'm allowed to bring that
12 outside a number a scaler can move
outside so I have 12 AVS 12 zeros I have
zero that's check to okay just
to it it's really critical to understand
the oh yeah here under what am I what I
was going to say understand what's the
point of a vector space let me make that
point by changing the right hand
side oops okay let me change the right
hand side to 1 two 3 4 oh okay why don't
we do all of linear algebra in one
lecture then we we okay I would like to
know solutions to this
equation to those four
equations so I have four equations I
have only three unknowns so if I don't
have a pretty special right hand side
there won't be any solution at all but
that is a very special right hand
side and we know that there is a
solution one were there any more
solutions and did they form a vector
space okay so I'm asking two questions
there one is do so my right hand side
now is not zero anymore I'm not looking
at the null space because I I changed
from
zeros so my first question is do the
solutions if there are any and there are
do they form a
Subspace let's answer that question
first yes or no do I get a
Subspace if I look at at the solutions
to let me let me go back to X1 X2
X3 I'm looking at all the X's at all
those vectors in R3 that solve axal B
the only thing I've changed is B isn't
zero
anymore do the X's the solutions form a
vector space no they don't they
absolutely don't why what's an easy way
to see that I don't have a the solutions
to this do not form a
Subspace the solutions don't because
what how shall I see that the zero
Vector is not a solution so I never even
got started the zero Vector doesn't
solve this system I can't the solutions
can't be a vector
SP
now what are they like well we'll see
this but let's do it for this example so
one 0 was a
solution you saw that right away are
there any other Solutions can you tell
me a a second solution to this system of
equations 0 ne1 1 boy that's
1 yes because that says I take minus
this column plus this one and sure
enough that's
right
so there are there's a bunch of
solutions
here but they're not a Subspace I'll
tell you what it's like it's like a
plane that doesn't go through the origin
or a line that doesn't go through the
origin maybe in this case it's a line
that doesn't go through the origin if I
graph the solutions to ax equal B so you
I I think you've got the idea subspaces
have to go through the origin if I'm
looking at X's then they better solve ax
equals
z in a way I've got my two subspaces
that I talking about today
are kind of the two ways I can tell you
what a sub about a about a
Subspace if I want to tell you about the
column space I tell you a few columns
and I say take their combinations like I
build up this Subspace I put in a few
vectors their combinations make a
Subspace now when I went to let me come
back to the one that is a Subspace
here here when I talked about the null
space I didn't tell you what's in it we
had to figure out what was in it what I
told you was the equations that I'm that
has to be satisfied you see those like
those are the two natural ways to tell
you what's what's in this what's in a
Subspace I can either give you a few
vectors and say fill it out take
combinations or I can give you a system
of equations the requirements that the
X's have to
satisfy and both of those ways produce
subspaces and they're the important ways
to construct
Subspace okay so today's lecture
actually
got uh the essentials of
3.2 the idea of the null space now we
have to tackle Wednesday the job of how
do we actually get hold of that Subspace
in an example that's bigger and we can't
see it just by ey okay see you Wednesday
thanks